DOCSUP-3417 translate to english (#16797)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: utils/db-generator/README.md

> ## Clickhouse query analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Clickhouse query analysis
```

> Here we will consider only select queries, i.e. those queries that get data from the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we will consider only `SELECT` queries, i.e. those queries that get data from the table.
```

> The built-in Clickhouse parser accepts a string as input, which is a query. 14 main parts are highlighted in the select query such as `WITH`, `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `PREWHERE`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY`, `LIMIT_BY_OFFSET`, `LIMIT_BY_LENGTH`, `LIMIT_BY`, `LIMIT_OFFSET`, `LIMIT_LENGTH`, `SETTINGS`. We will analyze the `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY` parts because the master data is there. We need this data to analyze the structure and to identify values.  The parser issues a tree structure after parsing a query, where each vertex is a specific query execution operation, a function over values, a constant, a designation, etc.  Vertices also have subtrees where their arguments or suboperations are located. We will try to reveal the data we need by avoiding this tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The built-in Clickhouse parser accepts a string as input, which is a query. Among 14 main clauses of  `SELECT` statement: `WITH`, `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `PREWHERE`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY`, `LIMIT_BY_OFFSET`, `LIMIT_BY_LENGTH`, `LIMIT_BY`, `LIMIT_OFFSET`, `LIMIT_LENGTH`, `SETTINGS`, we will analyze the `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY` clauses because the most of data is there. We need this data to analyze the structure and to identify values.  The parser issues a tree structure after parsing a query, where each node is a specific query execution operation, a function over values, a constant, a designation, etc.  Nodes also have subtrees where their arguments or suboperations are located. We will try to reveal the data we need by avoiding this tree.
```

## Scheme analysis

It is necessary to determine possible tables by a query. Having a query string, you can understand which parts of it represent the names of the tables, so you can determine their number in our database.

> In the Clickhouse parser, `TABLES` (Figure 1) is a query subtree responsible for tables where we get data. It contains the main table where the columns come from, as well as the `JOIN` operations that are performed in the query. Avoiding all vertexes in the subtree, we use the names of the tables and databases where they are located, as well as their alias, i.e. the shortened names chosen by the query author. We may need these names to determine the ownership of the column in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Clickhouse parser, `TABLES` (Figure 1) is a query subtree responsible for tables where we get data. It contains the main table where the columns come from, as well as the `JOIN` operations that are performed in the query. Avoiding all nodes in the subtree, we use the names of the tables and databases where they are located, as well as their alias, i.e. the shortened names chosen by the query author. We may need these names to determine the ownership of the column in the future.
```

> Thus, we get a set of databases for the query, as well as tables and their conventions (aliases), with the help of them a query is made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, we get a set of databases for the query, as well as tables and their aliases, with the help of them a query is made.
```

Then we need to define the set of columns that are in the query and the tables they can refer to. The set of columns in each table is already known during the query execution. Therefore, the program automatically links the column and table at runtime. However, in our case, it is impossible to unambiguously interpret the belonging of a column to a specific table, for example, in the following query `SELECT column1, column2, column3 FROM table1 JOIN table2 on table1.column2 = table2.column3`. In this case, we can say which table `column2` and `column3` belong to. However, `column1` can belong to either the first or the second table. We will refer undefined columns to the main table, on which a query is made, for unambiguous interpretation of such cases. For example, in this case, it will be `table1`.

> All columns in the tree are in `IDENTIFIER` type vertexes, which are in the `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY` subtrees. We form a set of all tables recursively avoiding the subtrees, then we split the column into constituents such as the table (if it is explicitly specified with a dot) and the name. Then, since the table can be an alias, we replace the alias with the original table name. We now have a list of all the columns and tables they belong to. We define the main query table for non-table columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All columns in the tree are in `IDENTIFIER` type nodes, which are in the `SELECT`, `TABLES`, `WHERE`, `GROUP_BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER_BY` subtrees. We form a set of all tables recursively avoiding the subtrees, then we split the column into constituents such as the table (if it is explicitly specified with a dot) and the name. Then, since the table can be an alias, we replace the alias with the original table name. We now have a list of all the columns and tables they belong to. We define the main query table for non-table columns.
```

## Column analysis

> The exact definition of data types for columns that have a value in the query is a continuation. An example is the boolean `WHERE` clause in which a boolean expression is tested against a specific set of attributes. If the query specifies `column > 5`, then we can conclude that this column contains a numeric value, or if the `LIKE` expression is applied to the attribute, then the attribute is a string type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we need to exactly define data types for columns that have a value in the query. An example is the boolean `WHERE` clause where we test boolean expressions in its attributes. If the query specifies `column > 5`, then we can conclude that this column contains a numeric value, or if the `LIKE` expression is applied to the attribute, then the attribute has a string type.
```

> In this part, you need to learn how to extract such expressions from a query and match data types for columns, where it is possible. At the same time, it is clear that it is not always possible to make an unambiguous decision about the type of a particular attribute from the available values. For example, `column5` can mean many numeric types such as `UINT8`, `UINT32`, `INT32`, `INT64`, etc. It is necessary to determine the interpretation of certain values since the enumeration of all possible values ​​can be quite large and long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this part, you need to learn how to extract such expressions from a query and match data types for columns, where it is possible. At the same time, it is clear that it is not always possible to make an unambiguous decision about the type of a particular attribute from the available values. For example, `column > 5` can mean many numeric types such as `UINT8`, `UINT32`, `INT32`, `INT64`, etc. It is necessary to determine the interpretation of certain values since searching through all possible values ​​can be quite large and long.
```
